
1. Which one of the following aspects is an exclusive characteristic of living things?(r) Perception of events happening in the environment and their memory.(w) Increase in mass by accumulation of material both on surface as well as internally.
2. The living organisms can be unexceptionally distinguished from the non-living things on the basis of their ability for(w) growth and movement(r) responsiveness to touch.
3. Biological organisation starts with(w) atomic level(r) submicroscopic molecular level.
4. Select the correctly written scientific name of Mango which was first described by Carolus Linnaeus. (r) Mangifera indica Linn.(w) Mangifera indica
5. Which of the following is against the rules of ICBN?(w) Scientific names are in Latin and should be italicized.(r) Generic and specific names should be written starting with small letters.
6. Nomenclature is governed by certain universal rules. Which one of the following is contrary to the rules of nomenclature?(r) Biological names can be written in any language.(w) The first word in a biological name represents the genus name and the second is a specific epithet.
7. ICBN stands for(r) International Code of Botanical Nomenclature(w) International Congress of Biological Names
8. Biosystematics aims at(r) the classification of organisms based on their evolutionary history and establishing their phylogeny on the totality of various parameters from all fields of studies(w) identification and arrangement of organisms on the basis of their cytological characteristics.
9. The book ‘Genera Plantarum’ was written by(w) Engler and Prantl(r) Bentham and Hooker
10. Linnaeus is credited with(r) binomial nomenclature(w) theory of biogenesis
11. Linnaeus evolved a system of nomenclature called(r) binomial(w) polynomial.
12. The term “New Systematics” was introduced by(r) Julian Huxley(w) A.P. de Candolle.
14. The common characteristics between tomato and potato will be maximum at the level of their(a) family(b) order
15. Which one of the following organisms is scientifically correctly named, correctly printed according to the International Rules of Nomenclature and correctly described? (w) Musca domestica - the common house lizard, a reptile (r) Plasmodium falciparum - a protozoan pathogen causing the most serious type of malaria.
16. Which one of the following animals is correctly matched with its particular taxonomic category? (r) Tiger - tigris, species (w) Cuttlefish - mollusca, class
17. Species are considered as (r) real basic units of classification (w) the lowest units of classification
18. Which of the following is less general in characters as compared to genus? (r) Species (w) Division
19. ‘Taxon’ is the unit of a group of (w) order (r) taxonomy
20. Sequence of taxonomic categories is(r) division–class–order–family–tribe–genus– species.(w) phylum–order–class–tribe–family–genus– species.
21. The term phylum was given by(w) Cuvier(r) Haeckel
22. A group of plants or animals with similar traits of any rank is(w) order(r) taxon
23. A taxon is(w) a type of living organisms(r) a taxonomic group of any ranking.
24. Basic unit or smallest taxon of taxonomy/ classification is(r) species(w) kingdom
25. Static concept of species was put forward by(w) de Candolle(r) Linnaeus
27. The label of a herbarium sheet does not carry information on(w) local names(r) height of the plant
28. Which one of the following is not a correct statement?(r) A museum has collection of photographs of plants and animals.(w) Key is a taxonomic aid for identification of specimens.
29. One of the most important functions of botanical gardens is that(r) they allow ex situ conservation of germplasm(w) they provide the natural habitat for wild life.
